[5.27.2025 Day One Notes]


Hien (Hin)- Post Doc researcher. Completed her PHD in Biomedical Sciences (I think) but currently works in immunology research. Husband lives in the Chicago area. Cooks mostly Vietnamize food at home. Recommends Saigon Noodle on the west side of Madison as the best place to get Vietnamize food. 

Athena - Recent PHD Graduate starting a job at Abbvie. Moving to Gurnee and starting her new role on June 10. 

Josh - PHD student finishing his PHD and mostly writing on his own at the moment. Seems to mostly keep to himself at least for the moment. Evidenced by expressed preference to work without Parth in the room at least for his Thesis. 

R Coding
	Packages: Seurat
		Objects are special. Rows are genes, Columns are Cell information 
		Each cell has its own metadata
	Likely want to do things in R because converting back and forth will be a pain 

Python
	Packages: SquidPi (spatial data) good vinettes which may be better than Athena's code, ScanPi


Temporary Admin Privileges 
Personal Laptop use (what is ok?) 

Question to ask Huy (Hweee) Dinh
- Temporary admin privileges: are the forms you sent me the correct forms
- Personal laptop use expectations
	Can I share a GitHub between home and work laptop
- Any papers of literature review that you would recommend



[5.28.2025 Day 2 Notes]

To do list
	Learn how to use the R package Seurat
	Review Josh's Notes
	Figure out how to get Slack notifications on computer

Meeting notes:
Seurat is the main package used. Traditionally single cell analysis but more spatial tools now. We can't find PMNs in one of the protein/RNA. Should check notes on which one that it is. SquidPi/ScanPi is the python equivalent. R is better at stats and Python is better at image analysis. An additional Python package is SpatialData. Recommend using jypterLab rather than JypterNotebooks.

You can convert the object between the two. AnnData <-> H5 (standard data object) <-> H5AD <-> ScEasy. 

CellRanger is made by 10X genetics with a chromium. Cell ranger gets us from the mRNA and protein to the H5. Not super relevant to my project from my understanding.

Suerat Tutorials:
https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/seurat5_spatial_vignette_2

Spatial Data:
https://spatialdata.scverse.org/en/stable/


Goals Post Meeting: (1) Transfer work into Jupyterlab rather than notebook.(2) Keep learning AnnData Format (3) Get Chat GPT on the desktop (4) Figure out conversion between H5 and AnnData (5) Get data for Merfish example to Desktop.

General Notes: In Python after a !pip install you must restart for anything to actually work. 

[5.29.2025]

Julia - Zhili Chen CMB Ph.D. program. Traveling to Mall of America soon. 

Moving data to Seurat to Python is very difficult and it may be necessary to learn the suerat structure in R first. Conversion to Python may not be achieveable in the near term. Parthi may be able to help. ChatGPT says the conversion script is likely doomed and I should manually export the pieces that I want. 

KNN Cluster Analysis -> will group cells. 20-30 cells are common. 
Look at gene expression within those neighbors. Resolution of the clustering

Tasks:
(1) Continue trying data conversion
(2) Learn Seurat data structure
(3) Figure out order for mouse, handrest, and maybe keyboard, and pens
(4) Red Cross Blood Vampires 

[5.30.24 Day Four]

Kicking off day 4 I was not terribly productive. Spending too much time on phone/internet. But even in bursts I can make up the time. I want to be out of here by 4:30 today so I will have to grind. I can watch some learning Spanish videos during lunch. 

I want to get get some more analysis of the data in python for both the RNA and Protein. May even be able to run a crap analysis neutrophil association with each test case. One idea that I had was to make a powerpoint each week with what I have done/learned to explain my current direction to Huy Dinh. IDK if I will have time for this by Monday but it may be the best way to broach the topic of more irregular hours/time moving forward. 

Goals
	(1) Learning Seurat would be very helpful. Much of our code base is done in this and I need to understand the data 	structure that I am working with how every one else understands it. 
	(2) Examine data in Python. This could mean doing different test and start determining the direction of the project.
	(3) Write out a document (probably python markdown on the data notation) 
	(4) Review other python squidpy packages that may be helpful in this analsyis
	(5) Figure out what KNN clustering is. 
	(6) Push-ups (warmup plus 3 sets) 

[6.3.2025 Day 6 Research]

Yesterday was at home sick. In general not showing as much motivation in this project as I would like. Hoping to make good progress this morning and meet with the rest of the lab later today. 

Did the Seurat Tutorial. Found out how to identify clusters by cell gene expression. My plan with this is to use this information to build out a map of the expression of those genes. I am skeptical of the mapping. 

Goals
(1) Keep Reviewing Suerat
(2) Load in the RNA data into python for review (DONE)
(3) Compile everything together to show Huy (Hwee) and Parth
(4) Get a mouse when I get back

Some main takeaways 5 days into this. 
(1) Finding colocalization numbers between the PMN and other cell types should not be super difficult but it may not be super interesting either. 
(2) Mapping the PMNs for protein to RNA may prove more difficult than improving the RNA mapping. 
(3) 

[6.5.2025 Day 8 Research]

Goals for today
(1) Find out how to flip graphs (DONE)
(2) Make a list of good match's for protein to RNA mapping (DONE)
(3) Single cell seq cont. 
(4) Start Powerpoint week 2 (DONE)
(5) Map responder status (DONE)
(6) Plot RNA Data expression of gene targets 
(7) Plot the uMap data in python (DONE)
(8) Try to find groups of cell in single cell RNA

[6.5.2025 Day 9/8ish]

Today I am finally feeling like myself again as the half marathon wiped me out and I feel pumped to take a another crack at this project. Three main project focuses at this point (1) colocalization numbers for the different groups (2) mRNA markers for PMNs (3) Mapping from protein to mRNA. 

I am worried that the mapping may not be realistic for a variety of reasons but mostly because of the different Z slices. PMNs typically don't come in clumps so a Z layer above or below may not actually be very helpful in determining cell identity but such a mapping may be possible for other cell groups. I should ask if there are other targets that I could focus on. 

Main goals for today:
(1) Run the 2D functions for Seurat (low prioity)
(2) Load the raw data into Seurat rather than the Seurat object
(4) Determine mechanism of the colocalization methods 
(4a) Determine SquidPY mechanism for this determination. Can I use the existing SquidPy packages. Maybe some prelim numbers
(4b) Custom program design. For example find the nearest T cell types to each PMN. 
(4c) Alternative Design in other programs
(5) Print out Red and grey outputs for the protein 

[6.9.2024] Day 9 Research 

Goals:
(1) Create PMN count function with input of for the name (done)
(2) Print out PMN graphs with PMNs in Red, everything else in grey (done)
(3) Refine print out function for co-locatioization (done)
(4) Get prelim co-localization numbers (mostly done)

Overall a productive day in python. Going in with clear goals helped alot. 

[6.10.2024] Day 10 Research 

Slow start to the morning. I really need more sleep on a regular basis. Feel like my goals are a little less concrete this morning than I would like. 

Goals:
(1) Get basic statistical tests done on protein data. (done)
(2) Start on week 3 powerpoint (done)
(3) Run 2D Seurat packages 
(4) Find best mapping candidates and put them in the powerpoint 
(5) Load in raw data into a Seurat object before normalizations are done

Personal:
(1) At least 2 sets

Parth Notes: Can run permutation tests to determine how much signal differences we are receiving. Should check how many neighbors each cell has to determine if I should change to different algorithm. 

Clustering test: 

(1) First past clustering of aggregate Z scores. Would group each run into different groups based on neutrophil expression. 
(2) Determine the number of neighbors for PMNs and what kinds of neighboring cells they have
(3) Determine if I wanna modify delauncy method triangulation. 
(4) Look at clustering groups in (1) and compare protein expression. 

[6.11.2025] Day 11 Research

Need to learn to kick it into gear from first thing in the morning. Better rested than I am on most days though. I have good prelim results from the colocalization test now. 

Now my main goals are (1) cluster analysis of the PMN Z score data. See if responders have a different profile than non-responders. (2) Figure out how to load the raw data into Seurat. (3) Run the 2D packages in Seurat (4) 

[6.12.2025] Day 12 Research

Pretty happy about the feedback I got yesterday. Makes me feel less lazy but I don't want to get complacent. I got to keep on this path and honestly ramp up my work. 

Goals for today:
(1) Compare clustering between R and NR in z score data
(2) Get Nearest cell types to neutrophils (70% fibroblasts)
(3) Determine average number cells each PMN interacts with per sample
(4) Clean up code
(5) Try radial method in comparison


[6.13.2025] 

Josh practice presentation notes. Mostly giving random feedback at this point 


[6.17.2025]

Not a great start to the morning. Need to get useful results for tomorrow's meeting with Huy. I am better rested than most days and am recovering from giving blood. 

Tasks for today:
(1) Make graph with cellular neighbors for responders vs non responders
(2) Example of neighboring cell types into pptx
(3) Clustering with the 64X gene expression work
(4) Examine the raw data 

[6.18.2025]

Starting is always the hardest part in the morning. Hard to get my body ready to learn and process in the morning. I am feeling less direction now and feel like I have tasks for today but am lacking what to do for the rest of the week. I feel that I have learned alot about colocalization of the data but am no closer to being able to map it. Parth gave a good suggestion that maybe what I need is to look from the T-cell perpective rather than PMNs. I think this is a better point than I initially expected. We want to predict the response of a patient to treatment. Why just focus on PMN cells? Why not look at other cell-cell interactions. In addition I have barely touched the actual expression data from any sample.

Goals for today
(1) Plot the genes that Huy requested
(2) Redo the proximity plot but instead from the Tcell perpective
(3) Check how accurate the CSFR3 gene actually is. The numbers seemed illogical to me. 
(4) Create proximity plot from the T-cell perpective rather than PMN. 
(4a) Plot pie chart with CD8
(4b) Plot pie chart with CD4
(4c) plot pie chart with Treg

Met with Huy this afternoon on progress last week. He had trouble following my powerpoint because I need to include more on the methodology of my slides rather than just plopping down figures. Huy did not love my Z-score analysis but found more promise in my pie charts of the cellular neighborhood. Now he has tasked me with a couple of different methods which have obvious problems in my minds (1) finding the T-cell vs PMN centroids and seeing if that is related to response (2) Finding the distances between a PMN and all T-cells and taking the average. This idea may be salvageable if I use criteria like minimum radius or nearest X num of T cells. One good new direction that he has suggested is to look more at the interaction with tumor cells either in comparision or on it's own. The main thing that he wants is a heatmap of the different cell types (by percentage) for each sample (TMA+punch).  

[6.19.25] Juneteenth Thesis Defense

[6.23.25] Week 5 Start - Almost Halfway

Got to work with some mice on Friday. Somewhat unclear where my next steps are going to be. The most interesting finding so far appear to be  that responders are more likely to interact with tumor cells. This relationship seems to be better predictor than T-cell interactions. I have some ideas from Huy from last week on stuff that I can do. 

Potential Tasks for Today:
(1) K means analysis of the Neighborhood Delta
(2) Start work on dividing the clusters
(3) Do some lit review on Tumor PMN interaction. 
(4) 2D gene expression analysis

Interesting results, from what I found the group of patients with high tumor colocalization with PMNs are more likely (maybe even significantly more likely) to be responsive to treatment. It's worth looking at literature on why this may be the case. Could PMN-tumor interactions help?

From the literature that I am reading this is the opposite of what I would expect. From most papers PMN-Tumor interaction is associated with  worse prognosis. Why the difference. Couple possibilities by order of likelihood (1) This is an artifact of the data, or random variation. We are probably close to significance but there are alot of unknowns. (2) PMN and Tumor interactions may be predictive not of prognosis but in response status. There is some evidence that high PD1 is shown in these PMN cells. May the drugs kill off these bad colocalizing PMNs? It is a hypothesis. (3) There are separate states (T1 vs T3) which may be either influenced by the drugs or be otherwise predictive of response. 

[6.24.25] Week 5 Tuesday 

Some initial results yesterday. I have only 1.5 days until I have to share results again. There are some things that Huy recommended that I have not done and I am questioning whether I should focus on them because I question the value of some of them. 

Huy's Goals 
(1) Cell type graph/heatmap (done)
(1a) T-cell relationship (done)
(1b) Tumor relationship (done)
(2) Grid Colocalization  
(3) PMN - Neutrophil Distances 

1b will be easy enough to do, goal 3 will be somewhat harder should not be too difficult. The local colocalization seems questionable in general and harder to implement. Ok so some good work today but everything always takes longer than I expect. I would still like to see the expression plots of those genes by EOD. May be useful

My Goals for Today
(1) Plot expression of some of those genes in mRNA and protein under the theory that they may show PMN-Tumor interactions. See word doc for the proteins
(2) maybe actually figure out how the raw data was made into a Seurat object



[6.25.25] Week 5 Meeting

Week 5 meeting did not go great primarily because I was sloppy with my graphs and Huy spent more time picking them apart then actually trying to listen to me. Something to reflect on for the future. I don't always fully trust his suggestions or our data in general so I have not idea how good the research I get out of this summer is going to be unfortunately. Like WTF is my PowerPoint even going to say at this point. Science is hard and I am beginning to think I am not a huge fan of research in general. 

He gave me some equations but I am not 100% sure what to make of them. Another plan could be to rush this project in hopes of being able to do other cool stuff that would be able to get me published. 

The most significant piece of data I have so far is not with the immune-pmn interactions but instead the tumor-pmn interactions. Why didn't this show up sooner in my data. The Z-score short have captured this comparing pmn-tumor interaction to baseline. Looking back at week 3 updates The average Z-score was indeed lower in responders versus non responders. But perhaps the Z-score is a poor measure because neither were likely to associate with tumors so it did not seem that strange that they were off. 

A neighborhood analysis may actually be better because comparing to random distribution may not be the most productive methodology. I would not expect 

Steps before EOD.
(1) Fix the powerpoint to have the real numbers
(2) Review the paper Huy sent me. Figure out how they got the justification that they did with the 15 um and 30 um boundaries
(3) Box plots of some kind

[6.26.25] Thursday

Went to bed too late watching CR podcast. Dumb AF idea. Need more sleep for heavens sake but I don't feel so bad. Am slowly appearing to lose weight as well which is nice. At least my shorts and pants don't feel so tight. It is odd because I have only lost 3-5 lbs and that shouldn't led to huge changes. My goal is to look good in a swimsuit for the July 4th parties.

Work is moving along. Need to produce something that is significant and more importantly justify my reasons for choosing the choices that I do. Huy picks me apart for my choices there.

Initial goals
(1) Find paper justifications for 15 and 30 um boundaries (20)
(1a) Change function to take microns as radius rather than pixels (done)
(1b) Review other plots for ideas 
(2) Create function to make box plots (done)
(3) Work on new algo on distances that Huy requested. 
(4) Understand 2D gene expression plotting better. 

My understanding of the new algo that Huy wants is that it will set the number of pairs to be equal to the lesser cell number. IE if there is 10 pmns and 4 CD8 then there will only be 4 rows and vice versa. 

The paper does not appear to give good rationale of why they chose the 15 and 30 um. Looking at open evidence there does not appear to be a consensus choice. In some cases it can be less then 15 um and in others than can reach to over 100 um. The way I will make this is by chosing a radius that is generally within the bounds or normal and I can show than changing it doesn't significantly alter the output. Plotting cellular neighborhood by radius reveals an interesting pattern. At small radiuses PMNs % is higher and tumor,fibroblast % is lower. Another interesting tid bit is that DCs ~8% of the neighborhood for responders versus ~5% in nonresponders.


[6.27.25] Friday (almost at halfway for this summer's project)

Still don't know that I am supposed get out of this project.

Goals for today
(1) Violin plots similar to the box plots (Done not a great way to see the data) 
(2) Find best way to plot data 2D in Seurat
(3) New Algo for distances (done)
(4) More lit review of relavent papers in the field  
(5) View raw data (done)

The raw data files are strange it appears that the gene expression data is divided by TMA, then FOV and then into 64 CSV files with gene expression meaning that there are a total of 68*64 total files that make up the protein expression data. There is also a 22GB file folder which might also be important. 

Protein Raw Data Strutuce:
* Protein Expression -> Per Cell Stats
* Spatial location ->Cell_Stats_FXXX.csv” files in the folder of “CellStatsDir”.
* There are some good image files that may be a useful visual
* The images in CellStatsDir do not line up perfectly. Some line up like F010 but other do not and the TMA core is not listed making difficult to match. 


The next step here would be to create a new algo to calculate the distances between cells but have it limited to the smaller number. IE a cell cannot be counted in a pair twice. This could be hard as that is not how my code works at this point. 

[6.30.25] Hungery for results

Need to find something cool and significant in the data to get any conferences or results from this paper. Need to ask for some time off as well.

Goals:
(1) Read through paper 
(2) Review Video
(3) Find outlier plots for Huy
(4) Compile new algo results for Huy
(5) Get P values

[7.1.25] New Month New Me (and new budget) 

Got my teeth cleaned this morning. Good news in general. Got two weak spots which may turn into cavities in the future but no immediate concerns at the moment. Haven't got anything done today though and it is 2 PM. Time to grind.

Still feel a bit lost. Need to cleanup and consolidate my PPX for Huy tomorrow as I will be gone for a good while. But having some kind of significant results. Might be good to do a practice run tomorrow during lunch before I see him. I still have not done much from the gene expression side. Want to be productive on this. 

My current results are statistically significant but somewhat flawed as I am weighing ever sample the same regardless of PMN cells. 

My hunch on the distance Algo was correct. While the pairwise method is not guaranteed to be lower distance on average it can be and should be in most cases are we are eliminating most far matches. In our averages they are longer in every case that I can find. 

Targets for today
(1) Review new distance Algo for Huy (done)
(1a) Figure out why distances are always greater (done)
(2) Review raw data structure with Parth
(3) Review Video 
(4) Start on creating box overlay 
(5) PPX Cleanup (done)






